KB: add the article for potential risk with fstrim (#54)
harvester/harvesterhci.io: kb/2024-01-30/the_potential_risk_with_fstrim.md

---
title: The potential risk with fstrim
description: The potential risk with fstrim and how to avoid it
slug: the_potential_risk_with_fstrim
authors:
  - name: Vicente Cheng
    title: Senior Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng
    image_url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng.png
tags: [harvester, rancher integration, longhorn, fstrim]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

The `fstrim` is the common way to release the unused space of the filesystem. However, we encounter the known issue with `fstrim` on the Longhorn volume. This article shares the potential risk with `fstrim` and how to avoid it.

The known issue is that executing the `fstrim` on the Longhorn volume may result in IOErrors if the volume is rebuilding. Related issue: (You can find more details in the issues)
  - https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/4739

>   - https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/7103

Author: I thought we could not focus on the `mounted` filesystem here. So I removed the `mounted`

## How to avoid the potential risk

The way to avoid the potential risk is to disable the `fstrim` in VMs. The `fstrim` is enabled by default on various modern Linux distributions.
You can check the following items for the potential `fstrim`.

:::note
The following items are for VMs that use the Longhorn volume, so `fstrim` will cause the above issue.
:::

  - Check the `/etc/fstab`. Some root filesystem will mount with `discard` option. Like following:
    ```
    /dev/mapper/rootvg-rootlv /                       xfs     defaults,discard        0 0
    ```
    
    You can remove the `discard` option to disable the `fstrim` on the root filesystem.
    ```
    /dev/mapper/rootvg-rootlv /                       xfs     defaults        0 0   <-- remove the discard option
    ```
    
    After removing the `discard` option, you can remount the root filesystem via `mount -o remount /` or just reboot the VM.

>   - Check the service `fstrim.timer`. You can **disable** it or **edit** the service file to make the `fstrim` does not execute almost simultaneously.

Reviewer: Please also add a command on how to disable it, thanks!

Author: updated!

>   - Check the service `fstrim.timer`. You can **disable** it or **edit** the service file to make the `fstrim` does not execute almost simultaneously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `fstrim.timer`: When this service is enabled, fstrim executes weekly by default. You can either disable the service or edit the service file to prevent simultaneous fstrim execution on VMs.
```

Reviewer 2: If possible, provide the file name.

Author: I also rewrite this section with the filename. Please help to recheck it!

>     Please check the following section and modify it to distribute the `fstrim` timing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You can modify the values in the following section To force fstrim to execute at different times.
```

---
title: The potential risk with fstrim
description: The potential risk with fstrim and how to avoid it
slug: the_potential_risk_with_fstrim
authors:
  - name: Vicente Cheng
    title: Senior Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng
    image_url: https://github.com/Vicente-Cheng.png
tags: [harvester, rancher integration, longhorn, fstrim]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

The `fstrim` is the common way to release the unused space of the filesystem. However, we encounter the known issue with `fstrim` on the Longhorn volume. This article shares the potential risk with `fstrim` and how to avoid it.

The known issue is that executing the `fstrim` on the Longhorn volume may result in IOErrors if the volume is rebuilding. Related issue: (You can find more details in the issues)
  - https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/4739
  - https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/7103

## The potential risk and affection with fstrim

> If you encounter the known issue on the above, that will result in the IOErrors. The IOErrors will cause the pod that uses this volume to be stuck. If the pod is critical, it will cause the application to be unavailable. For example, Harvester usually uses the Longhorn volume as the VM disk. After encountering this issue, the VM will flap in pause and running state until the volume rebuild is completed.

Author: updated

That does not affect the data integrity, but it will cause some panic issues for users. It caused the VM to hang, and the application will be unavailable. Consider the guest Kubernetes cluster scenario. When the VM is unavailable, it means the etcd service is not available. If half of the etcd service is unavailable, the Kubernetes cluster will be unavailable. Meanwhile, any services running on this Kubernetes cluster will be unavailable.

## How to avoid the potential risk

The way to avoid the potential risk is to disable the `fstrim`. The `fstrim` is enabled by default on various modern Linux distributions.
You can check the following items for the potential `fstrim`.
  - Disable the `fstrim` by adding the `nodiscard` option to the mount options on the `/etc/fstab` file. (`nodiscard` sometimes is the default value, but you can still add it.)
  

>     You can refer to the following cloud-init template.

Reviewer: Can we first have an example on how to change the fstab file, and then followed by the cloud-init example to configure the fstab while creating a VM.

Author: Remove the fstab part. Because the mount does not have an option called `nodiscard,` the default is to discard; we need to use the option `discard` if we want.
